     These are the unlikely avatars of biology's new age--a set of
test tube twins in London, a cotton boll in Alabama, a spider
mite in Florida, a bull named Hermann, a boy named Andrew, and a
white-faced sheep named Dolly.
     As milesttttones in the evolving technology of life, they are tokens
of a scientific upheaval that is transforming society as rapidly as it is
reshaping medicine, agriculture and the pursuit of science itself.
     Each is a creation born of a revolution in biology.
     A lab technician screened the twins--Hannah and Danielle--for
genetic defects when they were laboratory embryos outside their
mother's womb. Farmers cultivated the cotton from seeds created
by combining plant and bacteria genes, while the bug has a new
gene to help researchers track it in the wild. Los Angeles doctors
performed gene therapy on Andrew to strengthen his immune
system. Dutch researchers engineered the bull so it would sire cows
whose cream contains an important medicinal compound normally
found in human breast milk.
     In creating Dolly from a single adult ewe cell, researchers at
Scotland's Roslin Institute crafted the latest living invention to mark
the crossroads of science and human values.
     These experimental creations are more than laboratory
curiosities. Indeed, the seeds of the new biology are being sown
across millions of farm acres this year, and its fruits are appearing on
supermarket shelves and in medicine cabinets in hundreds of
thousands of homes. The biological revolution is altering--in ways
that we have yet to recognize--our image of ourselves.
     Researchers now are poised to push the technology of life into
even more challenging areas, some of them long forbidden by
federal regulation or by ethical and religious constraints.
     For many stientists, cloning offers an unprecedented opportunity
to engineer new life forms more efficiently, to revive endangered
species and to explore treatments for a host of human diseases.
However, critics in the United States and around the world have
argued that cloning oversteps the bounds of morality, offering
humanity too much power to manipulate living things. And the
prospect of cloning human beings, they say, is repugnant.
     While most scientists publicly reject the idea of cloning complete
human beings, many molecular biologists are eager to clone human
cells using the techniques developed by the team behind Dolly.
     To carry out those experiments, geneticists will be creating for
research purposes what many will consider human embryos. Such
endeavors have been forbidden to federally funded researchers for
almost 25 years, primarily because many people consider it wrong
to create a human life only to destroy it.
     Indeed, some respected medical experts have begun to quietly
debate whether they should attempt to cure hereditary diseases by
making genetic changes in human embryos that can be inherited by
succeeding generations. Many biomedical ethics experts, religious
leaders and researchers have long contended that such "germ-line"
genetic changes are too technically uncertain and morally perilous to
be allowed.
     At the same time, researchers at the New York Hospital-Cornell
Medical Center are preparing to conduct the first genetic
engineering experiment on healthy human volunteers. Scientists
investigating treatments for cancer and other diseases want to inject
harmless engineered genes into normal people to see how their
immune systems respond.
     Some experts worry that the research--touted as a way to better
understand gene therapy--may pave the way for other experiments
in healthy people seeking to enhance themselves genetically.
     "I am wondering if it is not time to set some limits on science,"
said Lori Andrews of Chicago-Kent College of Law at the Illinois
Institute of Technology, an authority on genetic engineering and
reproductive technologies.

A Pervasive Force in Agriculture
     The international furor provoked by cloning comes at a time
     when the medical and agricultural products of genetic
engineering are becoming pervasive.
     This spring, millions of acres of U.S. farmland are being sown
with seeeeds of genetically altered cotton, corn and soybeans. For the
first time, genetically engineered crops comprise a significant portion
of American agriculture, experts say.
     More than three-quarters of the cotton in Alabama last year was
genetically engineered to kill insects.
     Now researchers are experimenting with cotton plants that
contain polyester.
     Farmers are planting 8 million acres in genetically engineered
soybeans, 3.5 million acres in modified corn and 10,000 acres of
altered potatoes, Monsanto Co. officials said. The company is
selling genetically engineered seed as fast as it can make it.
     "People's heads are still spinning at how quickly this is being
adopted," said Margaret Mellon, a biotechnology analyst at the
Union of Concerned Scientists in Washington.
     Last spring, the first genetically engineered bug--a predatory
mite designed to eat insects that plague strawberries and other
crops--was released in Alachula County, Fla. The first transgenic
nematode worms, a laboratory variant of a garden pest, are being
field-tested in Salem County, N.J., with the hope that they
eventually can be rendered harmless.
     Even more dramatic are the inroads biotechnology has made into
medicine.
     Tens of millions of people have used genetically engineered
medicine to control heart disease and diabetes, treat cancer or
offset the effects of stroke, according to the Biotechnology Industry
Assn.
     Tens of thousands more routinely undergo genetic testing--either
to judge the health of their unborn children or to tell if they
themselves are susceptible to chronic diseases or cancer.
Thousands of children owe their existence to the innovations of
assisted reproduction technology such as in vitro fertilization.
     But sociologists and anthropologists who study the impact of the
new biotechnology say its most far-reaching effects may be on how
people think of themselves and their ideas of law, family, insurance,
property and animals. Fundamental concepts of what it means to be
human have been colored by the notion that the blueprints of all
living things are drawn from the same genetic code.
     "These ideas are a major consequence of the last 20 years,
entering people's consciousness piece by piece," said Alexander
Capron, an authority on biomedical ethics at the University of
Southern California and a member of the federal bioethics
commission asked by President Clinton to consider the implications
of cloning.
     "The advances in biology have made a huge difference [in how
we think] and it is only going to get more so," he said. "You can
avoid genetically engineered produce if it bothers you, but that is
very hard to do with an idea."
     In some instances, critics say, society has gone overboard in its
rush to embrace insights arising from the new biology. Henry
Greely, co-director of Stanford University's Program in Genomics,
Ethics and Society, said the scientific emphasis on genes is
unintentionally buttressing political beliefs that biology is the root of
human character and of social ills ranging from racial inequality to
violent crime.
     "Our society has been jumping in recent years toward . . .
scientifically unjustified and culturally dangerous ideas of genetic
determinism. [This] . . . is a gross overestimate of how important
genes are to how humans behave," he said.
     To complicate matters even further, the technology of test-tube
conception has divorced parenting from conventional reproduction
and made family formation less a matter of biology than of personal
preference and contract law.
     Prenatal testing also is creating a new generation of parental
obligations and strengthening the idea that the fetus has a legal
identity separate from the woman who bears it.
     "Biological innovations are often regarded as perversions when
they first come along. Then they often become widely practiced,"
said Caltech science historian Daniel Kevles.
     Then he paused and added: "I think there is something different
about the prospect of human croning."

